# Multiplicative groups modulo m

1. There is another way to characterize the prime numbers.
2. A number $p$ is prime if and only if it is the case that $(p - 1)! \equiv -1 \pmod{p}$.
3. Suppose $(n - 1)! \equiv -1 \pmod{n}$ were the case for some composite $n$.
4. A composite number $n$ is divisible by some number $k$ such that $2 \le k < n$.
5. Therefore, since $(n - 1)!$ is divisible by every number less than $n$, $k$ must divide both $n$ and $(n - 1)!$, and so $\gcd((n - 1)!, n)$ must be at least $k$.
6. However, for $(n - 1)! \equiv -1 \pmod{n}$ to be the case, then $\gcd((n - 1)!, n)$ must equal $1$.
7. Note that for $a \equiv -1 \pmod{m}$ to be the case, then there must exist an integer $k$ such that $a = km - 1$, which can be rewritten as $a - km = -1$.
8. If a number divides both $a$ and $km$, then it must divide $a - km$, i.e. $-1$, and so $\gcd(a, km) = 1$.
9. Since $\gcd((n - 1)!, n) \ge k \ge 2$, $(n - 1)! \equiv -1 \pmod{n}$ cannot hold for composite $n$.
10. If $n$ is $1$, then, trivially, $0! \equiv 0 \pmod{1}$.
11. For prime $n$, consider that every element of $(\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z})^{\times}$ has a multiplicative inverse.
12. Since $(n - 1)!$ is the product of the entire least residue system of modulo $n$ (excepting $0$), $(n - 1)!$ can be arranged into a product of pairs of elements of $(\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z})^{\times}$ in the form $ab \equiv 1 \pmod{n}$ and $n - 1 \equiv -1 \pmod {n}$.
13. Since it is only for prime $n$ where every positive integer $\le n$ has a multiplicative inverse modulo $n$, it is only for prime $n$ where the product of every positive integer less than $n$ inevitably takes the form $(1)(1)...(-1)$.
14. As such, $(p - 1)! \equiv -1 \pmod{p}$ holds for all prime $p$ and only for prime $p$.
15. The above property is called Wilson's theorem.
16. If $a$ is a natural number and $p$ is a prime number, then $a^p \equiv a \pmod {p}$.
17. The binomial theorem is a statement about the expansion of expressions in the form $(x + y)^n$:$(x + y)^n = \sum^{n}_{k=0}\binom{n}{k}x^{k}y^{n-k};\binom{n}{k} = \frac{n!}{k!(n - k)!}$
18. $\binom{n}{k}$ is called a *binomial coefficient,* and is read out as "$n$ choose $k$."
19. A binomial coefficient is always an integer: all multiples of primes in the factorization of $k!(n - k)!$ must also be in the factorization of $n!$.
20. If $n$ is prime, then $n$ divides $\binom{n}{k}$ for all $0 < k < n$. This is because $n$ always divides $n!$, but since $n$ is prime, it cannot divide $k!(n - k)!$ unless $k = 0$ or $k = n$.
21. As a consequence of this for prime $n$, the only terms of the sum not "zeroed out" by a coefficient which is a multiple of $n$ are $\binom{n}{0}x^{0}y^{p}$ and $\binom{n}{n}x^{p}y^{0}$.
22. This means that if $n$ is prime, then $(x + y)^n \equiv x^n + y^n \pmod{n}$.
23. It holds that $0^p \equiv 0 \pmod {p}$ for a prime $p$.
24. If we assume that for some positive integer $k$, $k^p \equiv k \pmod {p}$ is the case, then we can say that since the freshman's dream comes true for a prime modulus $p$, i.e. $(k + 1)^p \equiv k^p + 1^p \pmod{p}$, it follows that $(k + 1)^p \equiv k + 1 \pmod{p}$.
25. This is exactly our original statement $a^p \equiv a \pmod {p}$, which is called Fermat's little theorem.
26. A *primitive root* modulo $m$ is a number $n$ in $(\mathbb{Z}/m\mathbb{Z})^{\times}$ which *generates* every element of $(\mathbb{Z}/m\mathbb{Z})^{\times}$ through repeated multiplication.
27. That is, if $c$ being an element of $(\mathbb{Z}/m\mathbb{Z})^{\times}$ implies that there exists an integer $k$ such that $c \equiv n^k \pmod{m}$, then $n$ is a primitive root modulo $m$.
28. Only certain moduli have primitive roots: only if $m$ is $1$, $2$, $4$, $p^k$, or $2p^k$, where $p$ is an odd prime and $k$ is a positive integer, then the modulus $m$ has at least one primitive root.
29. If $n$ is a primitive root modulo $m$, then the multiplicative inverse of $n$ is also a primitive root modulo $m$.
30. A group where all of its elements can be generated by repeat iterations of its operation on a single element and that element's inverse is called a *cyclic* group.
31. The integers under addition form the archetypal infinite cyclic group, since any integer can be reached from a sum of terms of $-1$ and $1$.
32. $(\mathbb{Z}/m\mathbb{Z})^{+}$ is the archetypal finite cyclic group, being cyclic for every modulus: the cyclic group of order $m$ is often denoted simply $\mathbb{Z}_m$.
33. For any modulus $m$, one can get all of the elements in $\mathbb{Z}_m$ from repeated addition by 1.
34. All cyclic groups are abelian, but not every abelian group is cyclic.
35. It follows from the definition of a primitive root that a group $(\mathbb{Z}/m\mathbb{Z})^{\times}$ is cyclic if and only if it has a primitive root.
36. A group $A$ is *isomorphic* to a group $B$ if there exists a one-to-one correspondence between the elements of the set underlying $A$ and the elements of the set underlying $B$ which preserves group structure in both directions.
37. We write that $A$ is isomorphic to $B$ as $A \cong B$.
38. For example, $\mathbb{Z}_{2} \cong (\mathbb{Z}/3\mathbb{Z})^{\times}$.
39. The representatives of the set underlying $\mathbb{Z}_{2}$ are $\set{0, 1}$, while the corresponding representatives for $(\mathbb{Z}/3\mathbb{Z})^{\times}$ are $\set{1, 2}$.
40. In small groups like these, one can verify the isomorphism simply by exhausting all possible operation outcomes: we match $0$ and $1$ in the former to $1$ and $2$ in the latter respectively, and we match addition in the former to multiplication to the latter.
41. We can then take note that $0 + n \equiv n \pmod{2}$ and $1 + 1 \equiv 0 \pmod{2}$, while $(1)n \equiv n \pmod{3}$ and $(2)(2) \equiv 1 \pmod{3}$.
42. Since this covers every way elements can be combined within these groups, it is apparent that their basic structure is the same.
43. Every finite cyclic group of order $n$ is isomorphic to $\mathbb{Z}_n$ (aka $(\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z})^{+}$).
44. This property emerges from the fact that because for any cyclic group, having a single generator $g$, one can write all of its elements as the $k$-th multiple of that generator $kg$ (where $-kg$ denotes the $k$-th multiple of the generator's inverse and $0g$ is the identity).
45. If a group $G$ comprises the set $S$ and the operation $*$, then a *subgroup* of $G$ is a group formed from a subset $S' \subseteq S$ under the same operation $*$.
46. Much like it is often convenient to refer to equivalence classes by their representatives, it is convenient to say "elements of a group" to mean the elements of the group's underlying set.
47. Every group is a subgroup of itself.
48. The one-element *trivial group*, which consists of the identity element, is a subgroup of every group.
49. A group can have at minimum $1$ element.
50. Consider that the empty set can never be the underlying set of a group, because a group requires an identity element, and the empty set has no elements.
51. A subgroup $H$ of a group $G$ partitions the underlying set $S$ of $G$into a set of *left cosets* and a set of *right cosets.*
52. A left coset of $H$ in $G$ is the set $g*H = \set{g * h \mid h \in H}$ for some fixed $g \in G$.
53. A right coset of $H$ in $G$ is the set $H*g = \set{h * g \mid h \in H}$ for some fixed $g \in G$.
54. Left and right cosets can be viewed as equivalence classes formed out of the relations $g \sim h \iff -g * h \in H$ and $g \sim h \iff h * -g \in H$ (for fixed $g \in G$) respectively.
55. A subgroup always induces the same number of left cosets as it does right cosets.
56. Every coset in a partition is *disjoint* to every other coset in the same partition.
57. If $G$ is abelian, then the left coset partition induced by $H$ is itself the same as the right coset partition induced by $H$.
58. The number of cosets induced in the underlying set of a group $G$by a subgroup $H$ is called the *index of $H$ in $G$* and is denoted $[G:H]$.
59. $H$ induces its own underlying set as both a left and a right coset.
60. That is, if $e$ is the identity of $G$, then it is apparent that $\set{e * h \mid h \in H} = \set{h * e \mid h \in H}$.
61. Moreover, if $H$ is a subgroup of $G$, then $H$ must contain the identity element of $G$.
62. Given that every coset in a partition is disjoint from every other, the set $H'$ which underlies $H$ is the only set in a coset partition induced by $H$ which can underlie a subgroup of $G$, since $H'$ is the sole possessor of the identity of $G$.
63. Every coset induced by a subgroup $H$ has the same number of elements as $H$.
64. For example, if we take the group $\mathbb{Z}_6$, i.e. the additive group of integers modulo $6$, and its set of representatives $\set{0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5}$, it is apparent that $\set{0, 2, 4}$ and $\set{0, 3}$ each underlie a subgroup of $\mathbb{Z}_6$.
65. Note that, w/r/t addition modulo $6$, $\set{0, 2, 4}$ is cyclic and of order $3$, and as such must be isomorphic to $\mathbb{Z}_3$.
66. The set $\set{0, 3}$, w/r/t addition modulo $6$, is likewise isomorphic to $\mathbb{Z}_2$.
67. $\mathbb{Z}_3$ induces $2$ cosets in $\mathbb{Z}_6$, while $\mathbb{Z}_2$ induces $3$.
68. More generally, if $H$ is a subgroup of a finite group $G$, and $|G|$denotes the order of a group, then the number of cosets $H$ induces in $G$ is given by $\frac{|G|}{|H|}$.
69. If $H$ is a subgroup of a group of finite order $G$, then the order of $H$ divides the order of $G$.
70. This stems from the very ideas of subgroup and coset: a coset is an effective "translation" of an entire subgroup by an element in the group.
71. Suppose $H$ is a subgroup of the finite group $G$ and $|H|$ doesn't divide $|G|$.
72. It is insensible for the order of a group to not be an integer, so $|H|$ not dividing $|G|$ would imply that $H$ induces a "remainder coset" in either direction which would have fewer elements than $H$.
73. However, every coset induced by $H$ is an image of $H$ under the group operation, meaning two elements would be mapped to the same element by it, making this so-called "translation" non-invertible.
74. That is, for $|H|$ to not divide $|G|$ there would have to be an element in $G$ without a unique inverse, violating the conditions for a set to be a group under an operation, and so the order of $H$ must divide $|G|$.
75. That $|H|$ must divide $|G|$ if $H$ is a subgroup of a finite group $G$ is one of two theorems called *Lagrange's theorem*.
76. The *order of an element* of a group is the order of the cyclic subgroup generated by that element.
77. If $g$ is an element of a group $G = (G', *)$, then $\langle{g}\rangle = (\set{kg \mid k \in \mathbb{Z}\land g \in G'}, *)$ is the cyclic subgroup generated by $g$.
78. If $\langle{g}\rangle$ is finite, its order is given by the smallest integer $k$ such that $kg = e$, where $e$ is the identity of $G$.
79. Positive integers $a$ and $m > 1$ are relatively prime if and only if it is the case that $a^{\varphi(m)} \equiv 1 \pmod{m}$.
80. This follows directly from Lagrange's theorem and the definition of the order of an element.
81. That is, if $a$ is relatively prime to $m$, then $a$ is a class member of an element of $(\mathbb{Z}/m\mathbb{Z})^{\times}$.
82. As such, $a$ generates a cyclic subgroup of some order $k$ in $(\mathbb{Z}/m\mathbb{Z})^{\times}$.
83. By definition, since $1$ represents the identity class, $a^k\equiv 1 \pmod{m}$.
84. By Lagrange's theorem, since $\varphi(m)$ is the order of $(\mathbb{Z}/m\mathbb{Z})^{\times}$, $k \mid \varphi(m)$, and therefore there must exist some positive integer $n$ such that $\varphi(m) = nk$.
85. Following from this, since $a^{\varphi(m)}$ can be written as $(a^k)^n$, i.e.   $1^n$, $a^{\varphi(m)} \equiv 1 \pmod{m}$.
86. In addition, for a power of $a$ to be congruent to $1$ modulo $m$, $a$ must have an inverse modulo $m$, meaning that if $a^{\varphi(m)} \equiv 1 \pmod{m}$ holds, then $a$ must be part of a class in $(\mathbb{Z}/m\mathbb{Z})^{\times}$, i.e. $a$ must be relatively prime to $m$.
87. This property is called *Euler's theorem*.
88. Note that, since for prime $p$, $\varphi(p) = p-1$, so one can write $a^{p-1} \equiv 1 \pmod{p}$ if $a$ is relatively prime to $p$.  
89. This immediately implies Fermat's little theorem, or, one can say that Fermat's little theorem is a special case of Euler's theorem.
90. That is, if one multiplies both sides of $a^{p-1} \equiv 1 \pmod{p}$ by $a$, one gets $a^{p} \equiv a \pmod{p}$.
