# Commutative rings

1. A ring is an algebraic structure consisting of a set with a notion of "addition" and "multiplication" which must satisfy certain requirements.
2. Notation for a bare set which is mentioned to be a ring is assumed to be treated as a ring as opposed to a set, unless otherwise specified.
3. The first requirement is that addition in a ring must be an abelian group.
4. The second requirement is that multiplication in a ring must be a monoid.
5. The third requirement is that multiplication must distribute over addition.
6. The motivating example of a ring is the set of integers with $+$ and $\times$.
7. While $+$ must be commutative in any ring, $\times$ does not necessarily need to be commutative.
8. A ring for which $\times$ is commutative is called a *commutative ring*.
9. Commutative rings are central enough to arithmetic that from here, simply "ring" will be assumed to mean "commutative ring."
10. Properties which are said in this text to hold "for any ring" may not necessarily hold for non-commutative rings.
11. Rings are generalizations of the integers.
12. In the context of any ring (even rings whose set is not necessarily a set of numbers as such), $0$ is taken to mean the additive identity, while $1$ is taken to mean the multiplicative identity.
13. A *subring* of a ring $R$ is a subset of $R$ which has ring structure and which inherits the element $1$ from $R$.
14. A *unit* of a ring is any element $u$ for which there exists an element $v$ such that $uv = 1$.
15. That is, a unit is an element of a ring with a multiplicative inverse.
16. As such, if $R$ is a ring, the set of its invertible elements under multiplication is called the *group of units* $R^{\times}$ of $R$.
17. The set $\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$ is a ring for all positive integers $n$, so the multiplicative group $\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}^{\times}$ can also be characterized as the group of units of $\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$.
18. There is a ring called the *zero ring.*
19. The zero ring has one element, which is $0$.
20. $\mathbb{Z}/1\mathbb{Z}$ is isomorphic to the zero ring.
21. In the zero ring, $0 = 1$.
22. That is, if $0$ is the only element in a ring, then it is both the additive and multiplicative identity.
23. $\set{0}$ is a subset of every ring, but it is *not* a subring of any ring for which $0 \neq 1$.
24. An *integral domain* is a ring $R$ where if the product of two elements $n$, $m$ in $R$ is $0$, then at least either $n$ is $0$ or $m$ is  $0$.
25. That is, for all $n, m \in R$, $(nm = 0) \implies (n = 0 \lor m = 0)$.
26. An element $n$ of a ring $R$ for which there exists an element $m \in R$ such that $nm = 0$ is called a *zero divisor* of $R$.
27. As such, an integral domain can be said to be a non-zero ring with no non-trivial zero divisors, i.e. other than $0$ itself.
28. The integers form an integral domain.
29. The ring $\mathbb{Z}/6\mathbb{Z}$ does not, however, for example, because there is the product $(2)(3) \equiv 0 \pmod{6}$.
30. It follows that $\mathbb{Z}/p\mathbb{Z}$ is only an integral domain if $p$ is prime.
31. An *ideal* $I$ of a ring $R$ is a subset of $R$ which satisfies certain requirements.
32. First, $I$ forms a subgroup of the additive group of $R$.
33. Second, $I$ is closed under multiplication of its elements by elements of $R$.
34. That is, for all $n \in R$ and all $m \in I$, $kn \in I$.
35. From this, it is apparent that the set $R$ is an ideal in $R$.
36. The ideal formed from the entire set of a ring is called the *unit ideal*.
37. Every ring has a unit ideal.
38. Given $m \in R$, the *principal ideal* $(n)$ generated by $n$ consists of every multiple of $n$ in $R$. That is, $(n) = \set{kn \mid k \in R}$.
39. The idea of a *principal* ideal comes off as somewhat unmotivated when all examples are about the set of integers.
40. This is because the definition of a principal ideal as all multiples of $n$ coincides with the closure conditions of a general ideal w/r/t $\mathbb{Z}$.
41. That is, any subgroup of the additive group of $\mathbb{Z}$ is cyclic and can be written as $n\mathbb{Z}$ for some non-negative integer $n$, and consists of the integers $n\mathbb{Z} = \set{kn \mid k \in \mathbb{Z}}$.
42. Suppose a subgroup $A$ of $(\mathbb{Z}, +)$ were not cyclic.
43. That is, suppose the smallest positive integer $n$ in $A$ does not generate every element of $A$, i.e. there exists no $k$ such that for some $m \in A$, $m = nk$.
44. We can assume all positive integers because by group axioms, if $a$ is in $A$, then $-a$ is in $A$.
45. In order for $A$ to be closed, then, there would have to be some other non-multiple $c$ of $n$ in $A$ such that $m = nk + c$.
46. However, by Euclid's division lemma, $0 < c < n$, which contradicts $n$ being the smallest positive integer in $A$.
47. As such, every subgroup of the additive group of integers is cyclic.
48. The subgroups of this form are exactly the ideals of $\mathbb{Z}$, and so the ring of integers is said to be a *principal ideal domain*.
49. That is, a principal ideal domain is an integral domain whose ideals are all principal ideals.
50. It follows that $0\mathbb{Z}$ is the *zero ideal*, because it is the trivial group $\set{0}$, i.e. the set of all integer multiples of $0$.
51. Every ring has a zero ideal.
52. The zero ideal is always a principal ideal.
53. However, a principal ideal domain must be an integral domain, so despite the fact that the only ideal of the zero ring is the zero ideal, the zero ring is *not* a principal ideal domain.
54. $1\mathbb{Z}$ is the unit ideal, because it is $\mathbb{Z}$, i.e. the set of all integer multiples of $1$.
55. An ideal which is not the unit ideal is called a *proper ideal*.
56. A ring $F$ for which all non-zero elements are units is called a *field.*
57. $\mathbb{Z}$ does not form a field, because its only units are $1$ and $-1$.
58. The set of rational numbers $\mathbb{Q}$, however, forms a field because  for any non-zero integers $p$ and $q$, if $\frac{p}{q} \in \mathbb{Q}$, then $\frac{q}{p} \in \mathbb{Q}$, and $(\frac{p}{q})(\frac{q}{p}) = 1$.
59. If $F$ is a field, then $F$ is a principal ideal domain with exactly two ideals: $(0)$ and $(1)$.
60. If $R$ is a ring and $I$ is a proper ideal of $R$, then $I$ is a *maximal ideal* if there exists no proper ideal $J$ of $R$ such that $I \subset J \subset R$.
61. For any field $F$, $(0)$ is the only maximal ideal in $F$.
62. An proper ideal $P$ of a ring $R$ is called a *prime ideal* for any product $ab \in P$, either $a \in P$ or $b \in P$.
63. It follows that the zero ideal is a prime ideal in any integral domain and only in integral domains.
64. In the ring of integers, a non-zero ideal $(p)$ is prime if and only if $p$ is prime.
65. $(1)$ is the unit ideal, and is therefore not a prime ideal because it is not a proper ideal.
66. Suppose $(n)$ is the ideal generated by a composite $n$. Then $n = ab$ for positive integers $1 < a, b < n$.
67. However, if $n$ generates $(n)$, then $n$ is the smallest positive integer in $n$, and neither $a$ nor $b$ is in $n$.
68. If, on the other hand, $n$ is prime, then the only way to write $n$ as a product of positive integers is $1n$. Since $(n)$ consists exactly of the multiples of $n$, $(n)$ is prime.
69. Another way of saying that an ideal $P$ of a ring $R$ is prime is that the relative complement of $P$ in $R$ is closed under multiplication.
70. Elements of commutative rings have a notion of *divisors.*
71. Given elements $a, b, c$ in a ring $R$, $a$ divides $c$ if there exists some $b$ such that $ab = c$.
72. The notation $a \mid c$ extends to divisors in commutative rings.
73. $a \mid c \iff (c) \subseteq (a)$.
74. Much like rings have prime ideals, rings have *prime elements*.
75. An element $p$ of a commutative ring $R$ is prime if it is non-zero, non-unit, and for any product of elements $ab \in R$, $p \mid ab$ implies at least either $p \mid a$ or $p \mid b$.
76. Alternatively, $p$ is prime if and only if $(p)$ is a nonzero prime ideal.
77. Euclid's lemma tells us that the prime numbers (and their negative counterparts) are the prime elements of the ring of integers.
78. In a principal ideal domain, all non-zero prime ideals are maximal.
79. Suppose $R$ is a principal ideal domain, and $M$ is an ideal of $R$ such that $(p) \subseteq M \subset R$ and $(p)$ is a non-zero prime ideal.
80. Since $R$ is a principal ideal domain, $M = (m)$ for some $m \in R$.
81. It would follow that $(p) \subseteq (m)$ means that there exists some $p = mr$ for some $r \in R$.
82. So, $p \mid mr \implies p\mid m \lor p\mid r$.
83. If $p \mid m$, then, since $(p) \subseteq (m)$ and $m = pk$ for some $k \in R$, $(m) =  (pk) \subseteq (p)$, it must be the case that $(p) = (m)$.
84. If $p \mid r$, then $r = pn$ for some $n \in R$, $p = rm = pnm$, one can write $p - pnm = 0$ from which it follows that $p(1 - nm) = 0$.
85. Since $R$ is an integral domain and $p$ is not $0$, it must be so that $nm = 1$ and therefore $(m)$ is the unit ideal, i.e. the whole ring.
86. So, a non-zero prime ideal in a principal ideal domain is always a maximal ideal.
87. Given a ring $R$ and an ideal $I$ in $R$, there exists a *quotient ring* $R/I$ whose elements are the cosets induced by $I$.
88. The congruence relation which partitions $R$ into $R/I$ can be defined such that for $a, b \in R$, $a \sim b \iff a - b \in I$.
89. If $a \sim b$ is the case, then we can write $a \equiv b \pmod{I}$.
90. A *ring homomorphism* is a map from one ring to another.
91. That is, if $R$ and $S$ are rings, then $\phi: R \to S$ is a ring homomorphism if, for all $a, b \in R$, certain conditions hold.
92. First, $\phi(a + b) = \phi(a) + \phi(b)$.
93. Second, $\phi(ab) = \phi(a)\phi(b)$.
94. Third, $\phi(1_R) = 1_S$.
95. An *embedding* $\phi: A \hookrightarrow B$ of a structure $A$ in a structure $B$ is an injective map from $A$ to $B$ which preserves the structure of $A$ as a substructure of $B$.
96. Any injective map which preserves structure is an embedding.
97. If a ring is an integral domain, it can be embedded into a field $F$ as a subring of $F$.
98. The ring homomorphism $\phi : \mathbb{Z} \hookrightarrow \mathbb{Q}$ where $\phi(n) = \frac{n}{1}$ is not the only embedding of the integers into the rationals, but it can be considered the most canonical embedding.
99. That is, $\psi : \mathbb{Z} \hookrightarrow \mathbb{Q}$ where $\psi(n) = \frac{kn}{k}$ for some $k \in \mathbb{Z}$  has an image identical to $\text{im}(\phi)$because it maps integers to the same equivalence classes, i.e. reduced fractions.
100. The definition of $\psi$ is not "minimal," however, so it is a less attractive choice for canonization.
101. If $R$ is an integral domain, then let $R' = R \setminus \set{0}$. Then, there is an equivalence relation $Q$ which one can impose on $R \times R'$, defined where $(a, b) \sim (x, y)$ if and only if $ay = bx$.
102. The equivalence classes of $(R \times R') / Q$ are *fractions*, written the form $\frac{a}{b}$, where $a$ is the *numerator* from $R$ and $b$ is the *denominator* from $R'$.
103. Given two fractions $\frac{a}{b}$ and $\frac{x}{y}$, addition is defined as $\frac{a}{b} + \frac{x}{y} = \frac{ay + bx}{by}$ and multiplication is defined as $(\frac{a}{b}) (\frac{x}{y}) = \frac{ax}{by}$.
104. Since $R$ is an integral domain, one can check for oneself that $(R \times R') / Q$ inherits all of the integral domain properties of $R$ with these operations.
105. Note that $(R \times R') / Q$ is a ring, but $Q$ is an equivalence relation and not an ideal, so $(R \times R') / Q$ is a ring over a quotient set but not a quotient ring.
106. Since $(\frac{p}{q})(\frac{q}{p}) = 1$ for nonzero $p$ and $q$, it follows that every non-zero element in $(R \times R') / Q$ is a unit, which means that it forms a field.
107. We denote the field $(R \times R') / Q$ as $\text{Frac}(R)$, and call it the *field of fractions* of $R$.
108. The field $\text{Frac}(\mathbb{Z})$ is exactly the field of rational numbers $\mathbb{Q}$.

## Exercises

1. Show that the zero ring is the only ring (up to isomorphism) where $0 = 1$.
2. If $\phi : R \to S$ is a map between rings and the image of $\phi$ is the zero ring, then $\phi$ is *not* a ring homomorphism. Why?
3. Demonstrate that if $R$ is a principal ideal domain, then the only subring of $R$ which is also an ideal of $R$ is the unit ideal.
4. Let $u$ be *any* unit of a ring $R$. Prove that the principal ideal $(u)$ is the unit ideal of $R$.
5. If $n$ is composite, what are the maximal ideals of $\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$? What about if $n$ is prime?
6. Show that if $\phi : R \to S$ is a ring homomorphism, then $\phi(0_R) = 0_S$, and moreover, $\forall{a} \in R$, $\phi(-a) = -\phi(a)$.  
7. The kernel of a ring homomorphism is the set of elements in the domain which map to the *additive* identity of the codomain. Given a ring homomorphism $\phi : R \to S$, prove that $\text{ker}(\phi)$ is an ideal of $R$.
8. The image of a ring homomorphism $\phi : R \to S$ is a subring of $S$. Prove that $R/\text{ker}(\phi) \cong \text{im}(\phi)$.
